[MUSIC]
>> Douglas Crockford: So
has anyone heard of Monads?
Monads ring a bell?
So Monads is this thing from category
theory that found its way into Haskell,
which solves a particular
problem that Haskell has.
And it turns out to be
a generally useful concept, but
there's this amazing
curse that comes with it.
Once someone understands Monads,
they lose the ability to
explain it to anybody else.
>> Audience: [LAUGH]
>> Douglas Crockford: So
you can go out on the web, and
you can search for monad tutorial, and
read all the stuff that comes back.
And everyone's going, yeah,
this is the thing you need to know.
And you read it and it makes no sense
at all, and there's tons of it.
So Monads are this functional pattern
which are incredibly powerful and very
expressive but at the same time completely
impossible to explain to people.
So I'm gonna attempt to break
the curse today to give you
enough knowledge about this so
that you can actually go and
read that stuff and go, yeah,
I know what they're talking about.
>> Douglas Crockford: Cuz
it's interesting stuff.
So this starts in Functional Programming.
And as we talked about this morning, there
are two senses of Functional Programming.
There is the sense that we
use in programming languages,
which is programming with functions,
right?
And any language which has functions,
which is virtually every language,
if you program with those functions,
then you're doing functional programming.
So this found its way into
programming languages with
FORTRAN II in 1958
There's the declaration.
It was written in all caps because the
FORTRAN character set only had uppercase.
But except for that,
it looks remarkably modern, right,
with JavaScript's
functions look like that.
It didn't have a variable statement,
but it had a dimension statement.
Weirdly, variables were
declared by default.
So if you just used a variable without
declaring it and assumed it was a local
variable, which is actually a lot
smarter than what JavaScript does.
JavaScript assumes it's a global variable,
which is very bad.
And FORTRAN had types, so
it had integer types and real types, but
you didn't have to tell which one it was.
And the way they figured it out was,
if it started with an I, J, K, L, M or N,
it was an integer, and if it started
with any other letter, it was real.
Yeah, [LAUGH] like that didn't
cause any problems, right?
And then if you wanted to make something
global, then you would call it COMMON.
COMMON was FORTRAN's word for
global, so you'd declare it there.
Then the return statement didn't
have an expression on it.
So to tell FORTRAN what value to return,
you would have
an assignment to the name of the function
within the body of the function, and
that would set the return value.
So that when you finally hit
the return statement or fell out,
that would be the value that would go out,
so the last one of those would win.
And instead of curly braces it just
had an END to mark the end of it.
So that's sort of a boring
functional programming.
Functional programming gets more
interesting when you have functions as
first class objects
which we've been seeing.
In a particular high order functions,
which you can pass functions around these
arguments, you're starting to get a sense
that you can do some neat stuff with that.
And it didn't become really good
until scheme showed us how to
do lexical closure and then suddenly stuff
takes off and it get's really amazing.
Now the other sense of
functional programming is
Pure Functional Programming,
mathematical functional programming, where
functions in programming languages behave
nothing like mathematical functions.
Cuz a mathematical function returns the
same value every time you apply it, right?
You never have a function that
will return one thing and
then next time return something else.
They're item potent,
they're immortal, they're different.
So you can think of functions as maps,
so whether we pointed to something as
a database or as computation is
just an efficiency argument,
that both implementations
should be exactly the same.
That would be one of the rules
with mathematical functions.
Now, the argument for
wanting to program that way
is that mathematical functions
are easier to reason about.
And it's true, they are,
because for any function for
any argument,
it will always do the same thing.
Whereas, programming in real languages
gets more complicated because every time
you call something,
it could be different, and
one of those times it could be an error,
and it's harder.
So reasoning about things is easier, so
there've been a lot of mathematicians,
who've been saying programming
should be more like math.
>> Douglas Crockford: That means
programming without side effects.
Now, it's easy to turn Java Script
into a pure function language.
You just have to remove
the assignment operators,
get rid of loops because things
change inside of a loop, right.
We can't have anything changing.
So you use recursion instead.
You can use recursive functions to
replace loops, that works really well.
You would freeze all array literals and
object literals as soon as they're made.
So you're not tempted
to try to mutate them.
And you'd have to remove
things from the environment,
like you'd have to remove date,
because every time you call date,
you get a different time,
that's not mathematical.
You have to get rid of random because
every time you call random you
get a different value,
that's not mathematical.
So you take all that stuff out and then
you're gonna have to take out the dome
because every time you touch that it
changes, you can't change anything.
And then you realize this is getting
really hard, because you're having to do,
I own a system, in which nothing
changes and that doesn't work.
So, you know,
we talked about Memoization before.
It's one of the benefits
of being mathematical.
Cuz you can memoize and everything works.
So that's sort of dynamically making
the trade off between computation and
storage, or mapping.
Whereas, Caching, which is what
we do in mutating programming,
is hard and it's often wrong.
Cuz we're making bets on how long
some value's gonna be valid, so
we don't have to go across
the network to get it again.
And we're often wrong so
if the world never mutated, then it
would be easier to always be right.
But, of course,
the world doesn't work that way.
In the real world,
everything changes all the time.
And so having a programming language
in which everything must be immutable,
makes interacting with
the world really hard.
So there's this language called Haskell,
which is named after Haskell Curry,
Schonfinkelization of
Lambdas, and the Haskell
language doesn't know mutation.
And if you're just doing pure computation,
it's perfect, it's wonderful.
But if you then start to try to
extend the problem domain and
have it become a practical language,
then suddenly things get really hard.
And so they look for
someway that they could
have something that was like mutation
without actually mutating anything.
And they found something,
they found something in Monads.
Monads come out of category theory
which is a branch of type theory.
And Monads allow them to exploit
a whole and a function contract.
A function contract is that every time you
call a function with the same argument,
you have to get the same result and
cause no side effects.
But if you pass a function as
a parameter to a function,
well every function's different, right?
Cuz it's gonna be a new invocation and
it's closed over something else that
was never closed over before, so you're
constantly in this state of newness.
And you can kind of push that,
to kind of create the illusion of having
immutability even when you don't.
So in Haskell,
they came up with the IO Monad,
which makes it possible
to accumulate state.
And one of the motivating examples is
you want to be able to add
tracing to a set of functions.
But do that without having IO.
And the Monad provided
a way of doing that.
And so if one of these Haskell guys
is trying to explain it to you,
will try to be a Socratic, and they say,
okay, suppose you got a function and
you want to trace it, how you do it?
And say, well, I call it alert, but they
go, but you can't call any functions, so
how would you do it?
You go, well,
I guess I would have an array, and
I'd append something to
the end of the array.
They say, no, that's mutation,
you can't do that, so how would you do it?
And they're all like this
is some amazing game but
it's a solution to a problem you will
never have, and it doesn't make any sense.
If you start there, you will never get to
anything which is meaningful to you, so
that exercise is just a waste of time.